Volume Snapshot Support (#3839)
spectrocloud/librarium: docs/docs-content/clusters/cluster-management/backup-restore/backup-restore.md

[Add a Backup Location using Dynamic Credentials](/clusters/cluster-management/backup-restore/add-backup-location-dynamic)
guide.

## Volume Snapshots

<!-- prettier-ignore -->
You can include [volume snapshots](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/volume-snapshots/) in your cluster backups if the Container Storage Interface (CSI) driver you are using supports them. For more information about volume support, check the CSI pack README for your CSI driver. You can find a list of all Packs in the <VersionedLink text="Packs List" url="/integrations/" />
page.

<!-- prettier-ignore -->
If the CSI driver supports volume backup, check if the CSI driver includes the snapshot controller, the required volume snapshot class, and the required Custom Resource Definitions (CRD). Otherwise, ensure the cluster profile includes the <VersionedLink text="Volume Snapshot Controller" url="/integrations/packs/?pack=volume-snapshot-controller" /> pack

> included. Use version 8 or greater of the pack. The Volume Snapshot Controller pack is required to take snapshots of volumes. The Volume Snapshot Controller also includes the required volume snapshot class. Check out the [Add a Pack](../../../profiles/cluster-profiles/create-cluster-profiles/create-addon-profile/create-pack-addon.md) guide to learn how to add a pack to a cluster profile.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
included. Use version 8 or greater of the pack. The Volume Snapshot Controller pack is required to take snapshots of volumes if the CSI doesn't natively supports it. The Volume Snapshot Controller also includes the required volume snapshot class. Check out the [Add a Pack](../../../profiles/cluster-profiles/create-cluster-profiles/create-addon-profile/create-pack-addon.md) guide to learn how to add a pack to a cluster profile.
```

> 

Reviewer: :::tip

For clusters running Virtual Machine Orchestrator, the VMO pack has built-in support for Snapshot Controller and includes the VolumeSnapshot.

Author: I'm going to add a VMO section. I think it would be good to emphasize to still review the CSI README 😄

[Add a Backup Location using Dynamic Credentials](/clusters/cluster-management/backup-restore/add-backup-location-dynamic)
guide.

## Volume Snapshots

<!-- prettier-ignore -->

> You can include [volume snapshots](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/volume-snapshots/) in your cluster backups if the Container Storage Interface (CSI) driver you are using supports them. For more information about volume support, check the CSI pack README for your CSI driver. You can find a list of all Packs in the <VersionedLink text="Packs List" url="/integrations/" />

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can include [volume snapshots](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/volume-snapshots/) in your cluster backups if the Container Storage Interface (CSI) driver you are using supports them. For more information about volume snapshot support, check the CSI pack README for your CSI driver. You can find a list of all Packs in the <VersionedLink text="Packs List" url="/integrations/" />
```

page.

<!-- prettier-ignore -->

> If the CSI driver includes the [csi-snapshotter](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/external-snapshotter), it supports volume snapshotting. If the CSI driver contains the snapshot controller and VolumeSnapshotClass, then all necessary components are already included in the CSI pack and nothing else is needed. If not, you must add the <VersionedLink text="Volume Snapshot Controller" url="/integrations/packs/?pack=volume-snapshot-controller" />, version 8 or greater, to your cluster profile to install the snapshot controller and VolumeSnapshotClass. These components are necessary to support taking snapshots, including for backup purposes. You can learn how to add a pack to a cluster profile by checking out the [Add a Pack](../../../profiles/cluster-profiles/create-cluster-profiles/create-addon-profile/create-pack-addon.md) guide.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the CSI driver you are using includes the [csi-snapshotter](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/external-snapshotter) component, then it supports volume snapshotting. If the CSI driver contains the snapshot controller and VolumeSnapshotClass, then all necessary components are already included in the CSI pack and nothing else is needed. If not, you must add the <VersionedLink text="Volume Snapshot Controller" url="/integrations/packs/?pack=volume-snapshot-controller" />, version 8 or greater, to your cluster profile to install the snapshot controller and VolumeSnapshotClass. These components are necessary to support taking snapshots and including them in your cluster backups. You can learn how to add a pack to a cluster profile by checking out the [Add a Pack](../../../profiles/cluster-profiles/create-cluster-profiles/create-addon-profile/create-pack-addon.md) guide.
```
maybe? :)
Also, the first two sentences look a bit repetitive.

| ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| CSI driver supports volume snapshots but does not contain all the required components, such as the Snapshot Controller, and the VolumeSnapshotClass   | Yes                                      | Include the Volume Snapshot Controller pack in the cluster profile |
| CSI driver supports volume snapshots, contains the all required components, such as the Snapshot Controller, and has the VolumeSnapshotClass included | No                                       | Refer to the CSI Pack README for guidance                          |
| CSI driver does not support volume snapshots                                                                                                          | No                                       | Refer to the CSI Pack README for guidance                          |

### Volume Snapshots and VMO

<!-- prettier-ignore -->

> Clusters deployed with the <VersionedLink text="Virtual Machine Orchestrator " url="/integrations/packs/?pack=virtual-machine-orchestrator" /> do not need the  <VersionedLink text="Volume Snapshot Controller" url="/integrations/packs/?pack=volume-snapshot-controller" /> as the VMO pack includes the required components for volume snapshots. However, you must ensure the CSI driver supports volume snapshots. Review the CSI driver's Pack README for guidance on volume snapshot support.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Clusters deployed with the <VersionedLink text="Virtual Machine Orchestrator " url="/integrations/packs/?pack=virtual-machine-orchestrator" /> pack do not need the  <VersionedLink text="Volume Snapshot Controller" url="/integrations/packs/?pack=volume-snapshot-controller" /> as the pack already includes the required components for volume snapshots. However, you must ensure the CSI driver supports volume snapshots. Review the CSI driver's Pack README for guidance on volume snapshot support.
```
maybe?
